CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA   
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2025 
SINGLE AUDIT REPORT 


CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA 
Single Audit Report 
For the Year Ended June 30, 2025 


CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA 
Single Audit Report 
For the Year Ended June 30, 2025 
Table of Contents 
Page 
Number 
Independent Auditors’ Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and on 
Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed  
in Accordance with Government Auditing Standards ....................................................................................... 1 
Independent Auditors’ Report on Compliance for Each Major Program and on Internal 
Control Over Compliance; and Report on Schedule of Expenditures of Federal 
Awards Required by the Uniform Guidance ..................................................................................................... 3 
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards for the 
For the Year Ended June 30, 2025 .................................................................................................................. 6 
Notes to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards ................................................................................. 7 
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs for the 
For the Year Ended June 30, 2025 .................................................................................................................. 8 
Schedule of Prior Year Findings and Questioned Costs for the 
For the Year Ended June 30, 2024 ................................................................................................................ 10 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LSLCPAS.COM 
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING AND ON 
COMPLIANCE AND OTHER MATTERS BASED ON AN AUDIT OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PERFORMED IN 
ACCORDANCE WITH GOVERNMENT AUDITING STANDARDS  
To the Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council 
City of Oceanside, California 
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America 
and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of the governmental activities, the business-type 
activities, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of the City of Oceanside, California 
(hereafter, the City), as of and for the year ended June 30, 2025, and the related notes to the financial statements, 
which collectively comprise the City’s basic financial statements, and have issued our report thereon dated 
December 15, 2025. 
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the City’s internal control over 
financial reporting (internal control) as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the 
circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial statements, but not for the purpose of 
expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the City’s internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion 
on the effectiveness of the City’s internal control. 
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow management or 
employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct, 
misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal 
control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the entity’s financial statements 
will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or a 
combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe than a material weakness, yet important enough 
to merit attention by those charged with governance. 
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph of this section and 
was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material weaknesses or significant 
deficiencies and therefore, material weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified. Given 
these limitations, during our audit we did not identify any deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be 
material weaknesses. However, material weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified.  
Report on Compliance and Other Matters 
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the City’s financial statements are free from material 
misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant 
agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect on the financial statements. 
However, providing an opinion on compliance with those provisions was not an objective of our audit, and 
accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. The results of our tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance 
or other matters that are required to be reported under Government Auditing Standards. 


To the Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council 
City of Oceanside, California 
Purpose of This Report 
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and compliance and the 
results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control or on 
compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards 
in considering the entity’s internal control and compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any 
other purpose. 
Irvine, California  
December 15, 2025 
2


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT ON COMPLIANCE FOR EACH MAJOR PROGRAM  
AND ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER COMPLIANCE AND REPORT ON SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF 
FEDERAL AWARDS REQUIRED BY THE UNIFORM GUIDANCE
To the Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council  
City of Oceanside, California 
Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program
Opinion on Each Major Federal Program 
We have audited the City of Oceanside, California (hereafter, the City)’s compliance with the types of compliance 
requirements identified as subject to audit in the OMB Compliance Supplement that could have a direct and material 
effect on each of the City’s major federal programs for the year ended June 30, 2025. The City’s major federal 
programs are identified in the summary of auditors’ results section of the accompanying schedule of findings and 
questioned costs.
In our opinion, the City complied, in all material respects, with the types of compliance requirements referred to 
above that could have a direct and material effect on each of its major federal programs for the year ended 
June 30, 2025.
Basis for Opinion on Each Major Federal Program
We conducted our audit of compliance in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the 
United States of America; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and the audit requirements of Title 2 U.S. Code of Federal
Regulations Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal
Awards (Uniform Guidance). Our responsibilities under those standards and the Uniform Guidance are further 
described in the Auditors’ Responsibilities for the Audit of Compliance section of our report. 
We are required to be independent of the City and to meet our other ethical responsibilities, in accordance with 
relevant ethical requirements relating to our audit. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient 
and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion on compliance for each major federal program. Our audit does 
not provide a legal determination of the City’s compliance with the compliance requirements referred to above. 
Responsibilities of Management for Compliance 
Management is responsible for compliance with the requirements referred to above and for the design, 
implementation, and maintenance of effective internal control over compliance with the requirements of laws,
statutes, regulations, rules, and provisions of contracts or grant agreements applicable to the City’s federal 
programs. 
LSLCPAS.COM 


To the Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council  
City of Oceanside, California 
Auditors’ Responsibilities for the Audit of Compliance 
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether material noncompliance with the compliance 
requirements referred to above occurred, whether due to fraud or error, and express an opinion on the City’s 
compliance based on our audit. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not absolute assurance 
and therefore is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, 
Government Auditing Standards, and the Uniform Guidance will always detect material noncompliance when it 
exists. The risk of not detecting material noncompliance resulting from fraud is higher than for that resulting from 
error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal 
control. Noncompliance with the compliance requirements referred to above is considered material if there is a 
substantial likelihood that, individually or in the aggregate, it would influence the judgment made by a reasonable 
user of the report on compliance about the City’s compliance with the requirements of each major federal program 
as a whole. 
In performing an audit in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, Government Auditing Standards, 
and the Uniform Guidance, we: 
•
Exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit.
•
Identify and assess the risks of material noncompliance, whether due to fraud or error, and design and
perform audit procedures responsive to those risks. Such procedures include examining, on a test basis,
evidence regarding the City’s compliance with the compliance requirements referred to above and
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
•
Obtain an understanding of the City’s internal control over compliance relevant to the audit in order to design
audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances and to test and report on internal control over
compliance in accordance with the Uniform Guidance, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on
the effectiveness of the City’s internal control over compliance. Accordingly, no such opinion is expressed.
We are required to communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned 
scope and timing of the audit and any significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in internal control over 
compliance that we identified during the audit. 
Report on Internal Control over Compliance 
A deficiency in internal control over compliance exists when the design or operation of a control over compliance 
does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, 
or detect and correct, noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program on a timely basis. 
A material weakness in internal control over compliance is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal 
control over compliance, such that there is a reasonable possibility that material noncompliance with a type of 
compliance requirement of a federal program will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis. A 
significant deficiency in internal control over compliance is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal 
control over compliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program that is less severe than a 
material weakness in internal control over compliance, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged 
with governance.
Our consideration of internal control over compliance was for the limited purpose described in the Auditor’s 
Responsibilities for the Audit of Compliance section above and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in 
internal control over compliance that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies in internal control 
over compliance. Given these limitations, during our audit we did not identify any deficiencies in internal control 
over compliance that we consider to be material weaknesses, as defined above. However, material weaknesses or 
significant deficiencies in internal control over compliance may exist that were not identified. 
4


To the Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council  
City of Oceanside, California 
Our audit was not designed for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control over 
compliance. Accordingly, no such opinion is expressed. 
The purpose of this report on internal control over compliance is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal 
control over compliance and the results of that testing based on the requirements of the Uniform Guidance. 
Accordingly, this report is not suitable for any other purpose. 
Report on Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards Required by the Uniform Guidance 
We have audited the financial statements of the governmental activities, the business-type activities, each major 
fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of the City, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2025, and 
the related notes to the financial statements, which collectively comprise the City’s basic financial statements. We 
issued our report thereon dated December 15, 2025, which contained unmodified opinions on those financial 
statements. Our audit was performed for the purpose of forming opinions on the financial statements that collectively 
comprise the basic financial statements. The accompanying schedule of expenditures of federal awards is 
presented for purposes of additional analysis as required by the Uniform Guidance and is not a required part of the 
basic financial statements. Such information is the responsibility of management and was derived from and relates 
directly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the basic financial statements. The 
information has been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of the financial statements and certain 
additional procedures, including comparing and reconciling such information directly to the underlying accounting 
and other records used to prepare the basic financial statements or to the basic financial statements themselves, 
and other additional procedures in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of 
America. In our opinion, the schedule of expenditures of federal awards is fairly stated in all material respects in 
relation to the basic financial statements as a whole. 
Irvine, California  
December 15, 2025 
5


CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA 
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2025
Federal
Assistance
Federal Grantor/Pass-through Grantor/
Listing
Pass-Through Entity
Total Federal
Program or Cluster Title
Number
Identifying Number
Expenditures
U.S. Department of Commerce
Direct Programs:
Office for Coastal Management
11.473
N/A
34,160
$
 
Total U.S. Department of Commerce
34,160
 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development:
Direct Programs:
CDBG - Entitlement/Special Purpose Grants Cluster
Community Development Block Grants/
Entitlement Grants*
14.218
N/A
1,831,592
             
Total CDBG - Entitlement/Special Purpose Grants Cluster
1,831,592
             
Home Investment Partnerships Program
14.239
N/A
886,228
 
Economic Developmet Initiative
14.251
N/A
1,153,154
             
Housing Voucher Cluster 
Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers*
14.871
N/A
32,432,550
           
Emergency Housing Vouchers*
14.871
N/A
984,069
 
Subtotal for 14.871
33,416,619
           
Mainstream Vouchers*
14.879
N/A
1,344,928
             
Total Housing Voucher Cluster
34,761,547
           
Family Self-Sufficiency Program
14.839
N/A
117,344
 
Total U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
38,749,865
           
U.S. Department of the Interior
Direct Programs:
Title XVI Water Reclamation and Reuse*
15.504
N/A
5,504,089
             
WaterSMART
15.507
N/A
317,985
 
Pass Through Programs:
U.S. Department of Fish & Wildlife
Coastal
15.630
F23AC02317-00
18,684
 
Total U.S. Department of the Interior
5,840,758
             
U.S. Department of Justice:
Direct Programs:
Equitable Sharing Program
16.992
N/A
129,128
 
Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance
Grant Program
16.738
N/A
57,528
 
Congressionally Recommended Awards
16.753
N/A
23,493
 
Total U.S. Department of Justice
210,149
 
U.S. Department of Transportation:
Direct Programs:
Airport Improvement Program, Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act 
Programs, and COVID-19 Airports Programs
20.106
N/A
54,036
 
Pass Through Programs:
California Department of Transportation:
Highway Planning and Construction
20.205
EHEGWCLJEVJ4
1,298,610
             
Highway Safety Cluster
State and Community Highway Safety
20.600
EHEGWCLJEVJ4
301,605
 
Total Highway Safety Cluster
301,605
 
Total U.S. Department of Transportation
1,654,251
             
U.S. Department of the Treasury:
Direct Programs:
Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds
21.027
N/A
4,751,976
             
Total U.S. Department of the Treasury
4,751,976
             
U.S. Department of the Institute of Museum and Library Services
Pass Through Programs:
National Endowment for the Arts
Grants to States
45.310
N/A
136,917
 
Total U.S. Department of the Institute of Museum and Library Services
136,917
 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Pass Through Programs:
County of San Diego
Homeland Security Grant Program
97.067
DHWCF2KK8GF3
100,929
 
California Office of Emergency Services:
Homeland Security Grant Program
97.067
UTM3S7LKQZ4
242,350
 
Subtotal for 97.067
343,279
 
Total U.S. Department of Homeland Security
343,279
 
Total Expenditures of Federal Awards
51,721,355
$         
* Major Program
There was no funding passed through to subrecipients.
There were no federal awards expended in the form of noncash assistance and insurance in effect during the year.
See Accompanying Notes to this Schedule.
6


CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA 
Notes to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards 
For the Year Ended June 30, 2025 
NOTE 1: 
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES APPLICABLE TO THE SCHEDULE OF 
EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL AWARDS 
A.
Scope of Presentation
The accompanying schedule presents only the expenditures incurred by the City of Oceanside, California, that are 
reimbursable under federal programs of federal financial assistance. For the purposes of this schedule, federal awards 
include both federal financial assistance received directly from a federal agency, as well as federal funds received 
indirectly by the City from a non-federal agency or other organization. Only the portion of program expenditures 
reimbursable with such federal funds is reported in the accompanying schedule. Program expenditures in excess of 
the maximum federal reimbursement authorized or the portion of the program expenditures that were funded with 
state, local or other non-federal funds are excluded from the accompanying schedule. 
B.
Basis of Accounting
The expenditures included in the accompanying schedule were reported on the modified accrual basis of accounting. 
Under the modified accrual basis of accounting, expenditures are incurred when the City becomes obligated for 
payment as a result of the receipt of the related goods and services. Expenditures reported included any property or 
equipment acquisitions incurred under the federal program. The City has elected not to use the de minimis indirect 
cost rate allowed under the Uniform Guidance. 
NOTE 2: 
SECTION 108 LOAN PROGRAM 
In January 2019, the City entered into a contract with the United States Department of Housing and 
Urban Development for Loan Guarantee Assistance under Section 108 of the Housing and Community Development 
Act of 1974, as amended 42 U.S.C Section 5308. The loans are due in annual installments ranging from $171,000 to 
$279,00. Interest is payable quarterly at a rate of 4.8 percent. The outstanding balance at June 30, 2025, was 
$1,030,000.  The City pledged Community Development Block Grants/ Entitlement Grants program allocations and 
program income as security for the loan. 
7


CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA 
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs 
For the Year Ended June 30, 2025 
SECTION I - SUMMARY OF AUDITORS' RESULTS 
Financial Statements 
Type of auditors' report issued:  Unmodified Opinion 
Internal control over financial reporting: 
•
Material weaknesses identified?
    yes 
    X    no 
•
Significant deficiencies identified?
    yes 
    X    none reported 
Noncompliance material to financial 
statements noted? 
    yes 
   X 
 no 
Federal Awards 
Internal control over major programs: 
• 
Material weaknesses identified? 
        yes 
   X 
 no 
• 
Significant deficiencies identified? 
        yes 
    X    none reported 
Type of auditors' report issued on compliance for major programs:  Unmodified Opinion 
Any audit findings disclosed that are required to be 
reported in accordance with Title 2 U.S. Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 200, Uniform 
Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and 
Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform 
Guidance)? 
    yes 
   X     no 
Identification of major programs: 
Assistance Listing Number(s) 
Name of Federal Program or Cluster 
14.218 
Community Development Block Grants 
14.871, 14.879 
Housing Voucher Cluster 
15.504 
Title XVI Water Reclamation and Reuse Program 
Dollar threshold used to distinguish 
between type A and type B program 
$1,551,641 
Auditee qualified as low-risk auditee? 
   X     yes 
    no 
8


CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA 
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs 
For the Year Ended June 30, 2025 
SECTION II - FINANCIAL STATEMENT FINDINGS 
No matters were reported. 
SECTION III - FEDERAL AWARD FINDINGS AND QUESTIONED COSTS 
No matters were reported. 
9


     CITY OF OCEANSIDE 
Summary Schedule of Prior Year Findings and Questioned Costs 
For the Year Ended June 30, 2024 
No matters were reported. 
10
