

CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA
COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT
WITH REPORT ON AUDIT
BY INDEPENDENT
CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS
For the Year Ended Jnne 30, 2008
Prepared by the Accounting Division, Financial Services Department
Teri Ferro, Director of Financial Services
Melissa Slagle, Accounting Manager
David Crowe, Senior Management Analyst




City of Oceanside
Comprehensive Annnal Financial Report
For the year ended Jnne 30, 2008
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTORY SECTION (UNAUDITED):
Table ofContents
Letter ofTransmittal
Principal Officials
Organization Chart
GFOA Certificate ofAchievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting
FINANCIAL SECTION:
Independent Auditors' Report
Management's Discussion and Analysis (Required Supplementary Information)
Basic Financial Statements:
Government-wide Financial Statements:
Statement ofNet Assets
Statement ofActivities
Fund Financial Statements:
Governmental Funds:
Balance Sheet
Reconciliation ofthe Governmental Funds Balance Sheet
to the Statement ofNet Assets
Statement ofRevenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balances
Reconciliation ofthe Statement of Revenues, Expenditures
and Changes in Fund Balances of Governmental Funds to
the Statement ofActivities
Proprietary Funds:
Statement ofNet Assets
Statement ofRevenues, Expenses and Changes in Net Assets
Statement ofCash Flows
Fiduciary Fund:
Statement ofFiduciary Assets and Liabilities
Notes to Basic Financial Statements
- I -
Page
Number
I
V
X
XI
Xli
I
3
19
20
26
29
30
32
34
36
38
44
45


City of Oceanside
Comprehensive Annnal Financial Report
For the year cnded Jnne 30, 2008
Table of Contents, Continued
FINANCIAL SECTION (CONTINUED):
Reqnired Supplementary Information:
Note to Required Supplementary Information
Budgetary Comparison Schedules:
General Fund
Assistance Program Special Revenue Fund
Public Employees Retirement System - Schedule of Funding Progress
Supplementary Information:
Other Governmental Funds:
Combining Balance Sheet
Combining Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and
Changes in Fund Balances
Other Special Revenue Funds:
Combining Balance Sheet
Combining Statement ofRevenues, Expenditures and
Changes in Fund Balances
Schedules ofRevenues, Expenditures and Changes in
Fund Balance - Budget and Actual:
Asset Seizure
Library
Gas Tax
Community Development
Recreation
Maintenance Districts
STOP
Storm Damage
Grants
Other Debt Service Funds:
Combining Balance Sheet
Combining Statement ofRevenues, Expenditures and
Changes in Fund Balances
Major Capital Projects Funds:
Schedules ofRevenues, Expenditures and Changes in
Fund Balance - Budget and Actual:
Redevelopment Agency
General Improvement
- 11 -
Page
Number
104
105
106
107
112
113
114
116
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130


City of Oceanside
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
For the year ended June 30, 2008
Table of Contents, Continued
FINANCIAL SECTION (CONTINUED):
Supplementary Information (Continued):
Internal Service Funds:
Combining Statement of Net Assets
Combining Statement of Revenues, Expenses and Changes in Net Assets
Combining Statement of Cash Flows
Fiduciary Funds:
Combining Statement ofAssets and Liabilities
Combining Statement of Changes in Net Assets
Capital Assets Used in the Operating of Governmental Funds:
Schedule by Source
Schedule ofChanges in Capital Assets - By Function and Activity
STATISTICAL SECTION:
Description of Statistical Section
Financial Trends:
Net Assets by Component
Changes in Net Assets
Fund Balances, Governmental Funds
Changes in Fund Balances, Governmental Funds
Tax Revenues by Sources, Governmental Funds
Revenue Capacity:
Schedule ofAssessed Valuation
Direct and Overlapping Property Tax Rates
Principal Property Taxpayers
Property Tax Levies and Collections
Debt Capacity:
Ratios of Outstanding Debt by Type
Ratios of General Bonded Debt Outstanding
Direct and Overlapping Governmental Activities Debt
Legal Debt Margin Information
Pledged-Revenue Coverage
- 111 -
Page
Number
132
133
134
136
137
140
141
143
144
146
150
152
154
156
158
159
160
162
164
165
166
168


City of Oceanside
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
For the year ended June 30, 2008
Table of Contents, Continued
STATISTICAL SECTION (CONTINUED):
Demographic and Economic Information:
Demographic and Economic
Principal Employers
Operating Information:
Full-Time Equivalent City Employees by Function/Program
Operating Indicators by Function/Program
Capital Assct Statistics by Function
-IV -
Page
Number
169
170
171
172
173


INTRODUCTORY SECTION
(UNAUDITED)




December 9, 2008
IIonorable Mayor, Members ofthe City Council, and Citizens of the City of Oceanside:
I am pleased to submit the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) of the City
of Oceanside (the City) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008.
This report consists of management's representations concerning the finances of the City.
Consequently, management assumes full
responsibility for the completeness and
reliability of all of the information presented in this report. To provide a reasonable basis
for making these representations, management has established a comprehensive internal
control framework that is designed both to protect the City's assets from loss, theft, or
misuse and to compile sufficient reliable information for the preparation of the City's
financial
statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP). Because the cost of internal controls should not outweigh their benefits, internal
controls have been designed to provide reasonable rather than absolute assurance that the
financial statements will be free trom material misstatements.
The City's financial statements have been audited by Diehl, Evans & Company, LLP, a
firm of certitied public accountants. The independent auditor concluded, based on the
audit, that there was a reasonable basis for rendering an unqualified opinion on the City's
financial statements for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. The independent auditor's
report is presented as the first component of the financial section ofthis report.
The Financial Section includes the Management's Discussion & Analysis (MD&A).
GAAP requires that management provide a narrative, introduction, overview, and
analysis to accompany the basic financial statements in the form of Management's
Discussion and Analysis (MD&A). This letter of transmittal is designed to complement
the MD&A and should be read in conjunction with it. The City of Oceanside's MD&A
can be found immediately following the report of the independent auditors.
City of Oceanside Profile
The City of Oceanside (City) is a general law city that was incorporated on January 3,
1888. It is located 35 miles north of San Diego and 83 miles south of Los Angeles. The
City is located on the Pacific Ocean, offering a moderate climate that ranks as one of the
most desirable in the nation. Oceanside boasts 3.5 miles of coastline, a harbor with over
900 boat slips, and one of the longest wooden piers on the West Coast, measuring 1,942
feet in length. The City occupies a land area of 42 square miles and provides a full range
of services, including police, fire, library, water, sewer, street and other infrastructure
-v-


construction and maintenance, parks and recreation services. The City also maintains an
airport and a small craft harbor.
The population of Oceanside is estimated at 178,806, making it the third largest city in
San Diego County. The median household income for the City is $65,785, just slightly
behind the San Diego County median of $68,388.
The City operates under the council-manager form of government. The City Council is
responsible, among other things, for passing ordinances, adopting the budget, appointing
committees, and hiring the City Manager and City Attorney. The City Manager is
responsible for can'ying out the policies and ordinances of the Council, for overseeing the
day-to-day operations of the City, and for appointing the heads of the various
departments.
The annual budget serves as the foundation for the City's financial planning and control.
The City Manager presents the proposed two-year budget to the City Council for review
prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. The City Council is required to hold public
hearings on the proposed budget and to adopt a final budget no later than June 30, the
close of the City's fiscal year. The budget is prepared according to fund and department
(e.g., police). City Manager approval is required when transferring appropriations within
a department, between departments, and from an operating account to a capital account.
City Council approval is required on transfer ofappropriations between funds.
The financial activities of the four legally separate entities for which the City serves as
the governing body are also included in this report; the Oceanside Community
Development Commission, which includes the Redevelopment Agency of the City of
Oceanside, the Oceanside Small Craft Harbor District, the Oceanside Building Authority
and the Oceanside Public Financing Authority. Additional information on these entities is
contained in Note I to the Financial Statements.
Economic Outlook
San Diego County enjoys close proximity to the major economic centers of Los Angeles
and Mexico, and a prominent shipping industry assures ready access to Pacific Rim
markets.
Since the decline of the defense industry in the early nineties, the county has
been able to diversify into high-technology commercial endeavors, with growth in areas
such
as
telecommunications,
electronics,
computers
and
biotechnology.
Traffic
congestion, water supply, sewage treatment capacity and solid waste disposal are
challenges that are being studied by both the public and private sectors.
Along with every city and government agency across the country, the City of Oceanside
has been impacted by the national, state and local economic downturn. Coupled with the
rising cost of personnel, fuel, utilities, materials and supplies, the City also anticipates a
decline in the real estate tax revenue increases it has enjoyed over the past several years.
In order to adjust to the changing financial climate, the City has initiated the development
- VI -


of a five-year foreeast for both revenue and expenditures to assist in long-range finaneial
planning.
As a well-established coastal community, Oeeanside continues to be a destination for
retail, offiee and industrial development and these projects will help sustain the economic
viability of the City in future years.
Major Initiatives
Enhance and Improve Downtown Oeeanside
The Paeific Street Bridge, a City public infrastructure project, finished construction in
2008. New developments that opened in 2008 include the Wyndham Vacation Resorts
which has timeshares, and hotel rooms, a new restaurant called 333 Pacific, and
commercial
space.
Oceanside
Terraees,
a
mixed
use
development
completed
construction in 2008.
Several retail shops opened in Oceanside Terraces including
Harney Sushi, Red Cup Yogurt, Maui Coffee, and a clothing store.
Ocean Village, a
mixed use project completed in 2008 with a retail clothing store on the ground floor.
City
funded
projects
that
will
begin
in
2009
include:
Walkable
Communities
infrastructure design including bump outs, new street lights, and street furniture on
Mission Avenue; downtown drainage improvements; designing new beach restrooms to
increase capacity and renovating the beach amphitheatre; a new surface parking lot to
provide beach parking; a request for qualifications to develop a 450 space vertical mixed
use public parking garage in downtown near the train station.
Promote Tourism
The Marriott Residenee Inn opened in 2008 in Oeean Ranch Plaza with 125 rooms. A
100 room hotel located on Carmclo Drive is under construction and should open in the
fall 01'2009. The City approved a new resort hotel that will contain 289 hotel rooms, 47
boutique hotel rooms, 48 timeshares and over 18,000 square feet of commercial space.
The project should break ground by the end 01'2011.
The City funded the expansion of the Oceanside Museum of Art that was completed in
2008. The City is also funding the renovation of a City owned building which will house
the expanded California Surf Museum.
Both of these projects expand and enhance
important cultural resources in the Downtown area for residents and visitors to the City.
Job Retention, Expansion and Development
The City is working to retain and expand existing businesses in the City through a variety
of programs including a Business Visitation Program.
Staff is available to businesses,
property owners, brokers and developers to answer questions and assist them with
development processing.
A new Glass Enhancement Program is being designed and a
Fayade Enhancement Program is in plaee for targeted areas to revitalize commereial
buildings.
- Vll -


Retail Recruitmcnt
Programs available for retail recruitment include a commercial property database,
demographics, maps of new developments and customized research for retail property
owners, developers, brokers and users.
The City has an email based newsletter that is
sent monthly to the development eommunity and attends and participates in many
professional and community meetings, speaking engagements and trade shows to
promote Occanside to brokers, developers and end users.
Enhance the community
The City of Oceanside is halfway through the Environmental Impact Review process to
redevelop El Corazon, a 465-acre City-owned property.
The proposed EI Corazon
project would contain a mixture of land uses including: a 6 acre Senior Citizen Center,
which began construction in 2008; natural open space at 150 acres; 160 acres of active
park land; 6 acres for community public use; a 6 acre recreation center; a 16 acre green
waste facility, 9 acres oftrails and pathways, and 55 acres for retail and hotel commercial
uses.
EI Corazon is immediately adjacent to a Sprinter Light Rail station and will
enhance the Oceanside community with its mix ofuses.
Oceanside was chosen by the Veterans Administration (VA) as the home for a new
65,465 square foot clinic that will provide medical care for approximately 88,000 visits
per year and 180 employees. The ground breaking was held in December 2008 with the
project to be completed in early 20IO. City Fire Station #7 opened in 2008 at the corner
of Highway 76 and Foussat. The City funded facility received the Bronze Carecr design
award in the November 2008 issue of Fire Chiefmagazine.
The City began a Master Planning effort for Coast Highway and the west end of
Oceanside Boulevard by 1-5 areas.
The goal is to develop plans that would revitalize
these older, highway visible areas of Oceanside to help bring in new businesses and other
amenities for residents and visitors.
Other Information
Spending Limitation: Proposition 4, known as the Gann Initiative, was passed in 1979 to
limit government spending by capping the total proceeds of taxes that may be
appropriated in a fiscal year. When a city excceds the limit, excess tax revenue must be
returned to the citizens through refunds, rebates, or other means. The City is well below
the established Gann limit of $276,142,621.
Risk Management: The City has initiated self-insurance programs to provide for general
liability and workers' compensation claims. The City belongs to a joint powers authority
insurance pool to provide insurance coverage for payment of claims beyond its self-
insured retention. The fund revenues are primarily premium charges to other funds based
on past loss histories, as well as refunds from insurance premiums based on the City's
annual loss history.
- Vlll -


GASH 45: Effective July 1,2007, the City of Oceanside was required to comply with the
Government Accounting Standards Board Statement 45 (GASB 45) regarding the
reporting of annual "other post employment benefits" (known as OPEB) cost and their
unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities for past service costs.
This will foster improved
accountability and a better foundation for informed policy decisions about, for example,
the level and types of benefits provided and potential methods of financing those benefits.
Information on GASB 45 can be found under Note 13.
Awards and Acknowledgements
The Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) awarded a Certificate of
Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting to the City of Oceanside for its
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007.
The City received this award for publishing an easily readable and efficiently organized
CAFR that satisfied both GAAP and applicable legal requirements.
The preparation and publication of this report would not have been possible without the
dedication, professionalism, and teamwork of the entire staff of the Financial Services
Department. I would like to express my appreciation to all members of the department
who assisted in its preparation. The City Council has continued to extend its support to
the Financial Services Department in the planning of responsible and progressive
financial operations. I would like to thank the Mayor, City Council and City Manager for
their continued support for maintaining the highest standards of professionalism in the
management ofthe City's finances.
Re~~~
Teri Ferro
Director of Financial Services
- ix -


PRINCIPAL OFFICIALS
AT
JUNE 30, 2008
CITY COUNCIL
Jim Wood, Mayor
Rocky Chavez, Deputy Mayor
Jerome Kern, Council Member
Jack Feller, Council Member
Esther Sanchez, Council Member
ADMINISTRATION AND DEPARTMENT HEADS
City Manager
City Attorney
City Clerk
City Treasurer
Deputy City Manager
Deputy City Manager
Deputy City Manager
Economic and Community Development Director
Financial Services Director
Fire Chief
Harbor and Beaches Manager
Housing & Neighborhood Services Director
Library Director
Human Resources Director
Police Chief
Deputy Public Works Director
Water Utilities Director
Interim Development Services Director
ChiefInformation Technologies Officer
- x -
Peter A. Weiss
John P. Mullen
Barbara Riegel Wayne
Rosemary R. Jones
Michael J. Blessing
Michelle Skaggs Lawrence
Donald L. Hadley
Jane D. McVey
Teri Ferro
Terry Garrison
Ray Duncan
Margery Pierce
Deborah Polich
Brian Kammerer
Frank McCoy
Joseph Arranaga
Lonnie Thibodeaux
Lauren Wasserman
Michael Sherwood


2::.
CITY OF OCEANSIDE ORGANIZATIONAL CHART
Citizens of Oceanside
City Treasurer
City Clerk
Boards, Commissions
City Council
and Advisory Bodies
City Attorney
City Manager
Deputy City Manager
Deputy City Manager
Deputy City Manager
Information
Public Works
Technologies
I
I
Library
Fire
Police
Financial Services
Water Utilities
I
I
Neighborhood
Economic and
Harbor and
Services
Human Resources
Community
Development Services
Beaches
Development


Certificate of
Achievement
for Excellence
in Financial
Reporting
Presented to
City of Oceanside
California
For its Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report
for the Fiscal Year Ended
June 30, 2007
A Certificate ofAchievement for Excellence in Financial
Reporting is presented by the Government Finance Officers
Association of the United States and Canada to
government units and public employee retirement
systems whose comprehensive anllualfinancial
reports (CAFRs) achieve the highest
standards in government accounting
and financial reporting,
President
Executive Director
- xu -
