 
 
 
CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA 
 
SINGLE AUDIT REPORT 
 
JUNE 30, 2013 
 


 
 
 
 
CITY OF OCEANSIDE, CALIFORNIA 
 
SINGLE AUDIT REPORT 
 
JUNE 30, 2013


 
 
 
 
CITY OF OCEANSIDE 
 
JUNE 30, 2013 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Page 
 
Number 
 
Independent Auditors’ Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and on Compliance  
and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed  
in Accordance with Government Auditing Standards ...................................................................... 1 
 
Independent Auditors’ Report on Compliance for Each Major Program and  
 on Internal Control Over Compliance required by OMB Circular A-133 .............................................. 3 
 
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards for the 
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2013 ........................................................................................................ 6 
 
Notes to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards .................................................................... 8 
 
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs for the 
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2013 ........................................................................................................ 9 
 
Schedule of Prior Year Findings and Questioned Costs for the 
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2012 ...................................................................................................... 11 
 
 
 


 
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL 
OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING AND ON COMPLIANCE AND OTHER MATTERS 
BASED ON AN AUDIT OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PERFORMED IN ACCORDANCE 
 WITH GOVERNMENT AUDITING STANDARDS 
 
To the Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council 
City of Oceanside, California 
 
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of 
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of the governmental 
activities, the business-type activities, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of 
City of Oceanside, California, (the City) as of and for the year ended June 30, 2013, and the related notes 
to the financial statements, which collectively comprise the City’s basic financial statements, and have 
issued our report thereon dated December 2, 2013. 
 
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting 
 
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the City’s internal control 
over financial reporting (internal control) to determine the audit procedures that are appropriate in the 
circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial statements, but not for the 
purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the City’s internal control. Accordingly, we do 
not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the City’s internal control. 
 
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow 
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or 
detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a 
combination of deficiencies, in internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material 
misstatement of the entity’s financial statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a 
timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control 
that is less severe than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged 
with governance. 
 
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph of this 
section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material 
weaknesses or significant deficiencies. Given these limitations, during our audit we did not identify any 
deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, material 
weaknesses may exist that have not been identified. 
 
Compliance and Other Matters 
 
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the City’s financial statements are free from 
material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, 
contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect on 
the determination of financial statement amounts. However, providing an opinion on compliance with 
those provisions was not an objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. 
The results of our tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be 
reported under Government Auditing Standards. 


To the Ho
City of Oc
 
The City’s
findings a
in the aud
The purpo
and the r
control or
Governm
this comm
 
 
Brea, Cal
Decembe
 
 
onorable Mayo
ceanside, Cal
s response to
and questione
dit of the finan
ose of this rep
esults of that
r on complia
ment Auditing
munication is n
ifornia 
er 2, 2013 
or and Memb
ifornia 
o the findings 
ed costs. The 
ncial statemen
port is solely 
t testing, and
ance. This re
g Standards 
not suitable fo
bers of the Cit
City’s Res
identified in o
City’s respon
nts and, acco
Purpos
to describe th
d not to provi
eport is an in
in considerin
or any other p
ty Council 
sponse to Fin
 
our audit are 
nse was not s
rdingly, we ex
 
e of this Rep
 
he scope of o
de an opinio
ntegral part 
ng the City’s in
purpose. 
 
ndings 
described in
subjected to t
xpress no op
port 
our testing of 
n on the effe
of an audit 
nternal contro
 the accompa
the auditing p
inion on it. 
internal contr
ectiveness of 
performed in
ol and compli
anying sched
procedures ap
rol and comp
f the City’s in
n accordance
iance. Accord
dule of 
pplied 
liance 
nternal 
e with 
dingly, 
2


INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT ON COMPLIANCE FOR EACH MAJOR PROGRAM AND ON 
INTERNAL CONTROL OVER COMPLIANCE AND SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL 
AWARDS REQUIRED BY OMB CIRCULAR A-133 
 
To the Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council  
City of Oceanside, California 
 
Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program 
 
We have audited the City of Oceanside’s compliance with the types of compliance requirements 
described in the OMB Circular A-133 Compliance Supplement that could have a direct and material effect 
on each of the City of Oceanside’s major federal programs for the year ended June 30, 2013. The City of 
Oceanside’s major federal programs are identified in the summary of auditor’s results section of the 
accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs. 
 
Management’s Responsibility  
 
Management is responsible for compliance with the requirements of law, regulations, contracts, and 
grants applicable to its federal programs. 
 
Auditor’s Responsibility 
 
Our responsibility is to express opinions on compliance for each of the City of Oceanside’s major federal 
programs based on our audit of the types of compliance requirements referred to above. We conducted 
our audit of compliance in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of 
America; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in the Government Auditing Standards, 
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, and OMB A-133, Audits of States, Local 
Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations. Those standards and OMB Circular A-133 require that we 
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether noncompliance with the types 
of compliance requirements referred above that could have a direct and material effect on a major federal 
program occurred. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence about the City of Oceanside’s 
compliance with those requirements and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary 
in the circumstances. 
 
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion on compliance for each major 
federal program. However, our audit does not provide legal determination of the City of Oceanside’s 
compliance. 
 
Opinion on Each Major Federal Program 
 
In our opinion, the City of Oceanside complied, in all material respects, with the types of compliance 
requirements referred to above that could have a direct and material effect on each of its major federal 
programs for the year ended June 30, 2013. 


 
To the Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council 
City of Oceanside, California 
 
Report on Internal Control over Compliance 
 
Management of the City of Oceanside is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal 
control over compliance with the type of compliance requirements referred to above. In planning and 
performing our audit of compliance, we considered the City of Oceanside’s internal control over 
compliance with the types of requirements that could have a direct and material effect on each major 
federal program to determine the auditing procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances for the 
purpose of expressing an opinion on compliance for each major federal program and to test and report on 
internal controls over compliance in accordance with OMB Circular A-133, but not for the purpose of 
expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control over compliance. Accordingly, we do not 
express an opinion on the effectiveness of the City of Oceanside’s internal control over compliance. 
 
A deficiency in internal control over compliance exists when the design or operation of a control over 
compliance does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned 
functions, to prevent, or detect and correct, noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a 
federal program on a timely basis. A material weakness in internal control over compliance is a 
deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over compliance, such that there is a 
reasonable possibility that a material noncompliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal 
program will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency in 
internal control over compliance is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over 
compliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal program that is less severe than a material 
weakness in internal control over compliance, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged 
with governance. 
 
Our consideration of internal control over compliance was for the limited purpose described in the first 
paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control over 
compliance that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies. We did not identify any 
deficiencies in internal control over compliance that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, 
material weaknesses may exist that have not been identified.  
 
Report on the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards Required by OMB Circular A-133 
 
We have audited the financial statements of the governmental activities, the business-type activities, each 
major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of the City of Oceanside, California, as of and 
for the year ended June 30, 2013, and have issued  our report thereon dated December 2, 2013, which 
contained an unmodified opinion on those financial statements. Our audit was performed for the purpose 
of forming opinions on the financial statements as a whole. The schedule of expenditures of federal 
awards is presented for the purposes of additional analysis as required by U.S. Office of Management 
and Budget Circular A-133, Audits of States, Local Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations, and is 
not a required part of the basic financial statements. Such information is the responsibility of management 
and was derived from and relates directly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare 
the basic financial statements. The information has been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in 
the audit of the financial statements and certain additional procedures, including comparing and 
reconciling such information directly to the underlying accounting and other records used to prepare the 
basic financial statements or to the basic financial statements themselves, and other additional 
procedures in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America. In 
our opinion, the schedule of expenditures of federal awards is fairly stated in all material respects in 
relation to the financial statements as a whole. 
4


To the Ho
City of Oc
 
The purp
testing of 
OMB Circ
 
 
Brea, Cal
February 
Decembe
 
onorable Mayo
ceanside, Cal
ose of this re
internal cont
cular A-133. A
ifornia 
10, 2014 (
er 2, 2013.) 
or and Memb
ifornia 
eport on inte
trol over com
Accordingly, th
(Except for t
bers of the Cit
ernal control 
mpliance and 
his communic
the schedule
ty Council 
over complia
the results o
cation is not s
 
e of expend
ance is solely
of that testing
suitable for an
ditures of fed
y to describe
g based on th
ny other purpo
deral awards
e the scope o
he requireme
ose. 
s which is 
of our 
nts of 
dated  
5


CITY OF OCEANSIDE
SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL AWARDS
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2013
Federal
Pass-Through
CFDA
Grantor's
Federal Grantor/Pass-Through Grantor/Program Title
Number
Number
Expenditures
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Direct Programs:
Community Development Block Grant*
14.218
B10‐MC‐06‐0547
1,363,760
$    
Supportive Housing Program
14.235
CA0714B9D101003
86,779
           
CA0714B9D101104
61,213
           
147,992
         
HOME Investment Partnerships Program
14.239
M5-MC-06-0523
395,237
         
M10-MC-06-0523
40,057
           
435,294
         
ARRA - Homelessness Prevention and Rapid Re-
Housing Program (Recovery Act Funded)
14.257
S09-MY-06-0547
27,772
           
Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers*
14.871
CA132VO
15,763,081
    
     Total U.S. Department of Housing
       and Urban Development
17,737,899
    
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
Direct Program:
Title XVI Water Reclamation and Reuse Program
15.504
R11AC35296
517,994
         
     Total U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
517,994
         
U.S. Department of Justice
Direct Program:
Asset Seizure Fund
16.607
N/A
10,935
           
N/A
21,311
           
32,246
           
Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant
Program
16.738
2008-SB-B9-0786
53,509
           
2010-SB-B9-0784
23,519
           
2011-DJ-BX-2910
62,907
           
139,935
         
Passed through the County of San Diego
Sheriff's Department:
San Diego County North Regional Gang Enforcement
Collaboration
16.753
N/A
21,709
           
Services for Trafficking Victims
16.320
517470
406
                
     Total U.S. Department of Justice
194,296
         
6


CITY OF OCEANSIDE
SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL AWARDS
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2013
Federal
Pass-Through
CFDA
Grantor's
Federal Grantor/Pass-Through Grantor/Program Title
Number
Number
Expenditures
U.S. Department of Transportation
Passed through the State of California
Office of Traffic Safety:
State and Community Highway Safety
20.600
20420
60,920
           
PT1398
31,200
           
SC13291
57,908
           
150,028
         
Passed through UC Berkeley Traffic Safety Center:
Minimum Penalties for Repeat Offenders for Driving
While Intoxicated
20.608
AL0939
9,181
             
     Total U.S. Department of Transportation
159,209
         
National Endowment for the Arts
Direct Program:
Promotion of the Arts Grants to Organizations and
Individuals
45.024
N/A
1,770
             
     Total National Endowment for the Arts
1,770
             
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Direct Program:
Assistance to Firefighters Grant
97.044
EMW-2011-FO-01340
10,000
           
Passed through the California Emergency Management 
Agency:
Homeland Security Grant Program
97.067
N/A
88,589
           
N/A
153,496
         
242,085
         
Passed through the County of San Diego:
Homeland Security Grant Program
97.067
073-00000
224,069
         
073-00001
33,711
           
257,780
         
     Total U.S. Department of Homeland Security
509,865
         
     Total Federal Expenditures
19,121,033
$  
* Major Program
Note a: Refer to Note 1 to the schedule of expenditures of federal awards for a description of 
significant accounting policies used in preparing this schedule.
Note b: There was no federal awards expended in the form of noncash assistance and insurance in effect
during the year.
Note c: Total amount provided to subrecipients during the year was $70,549.
7


 
 
CITY OF OCEANSIDE 
 
NOTES TO THE SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL AWARDS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2013 
 
Note 1: 
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Applicable to the Schedule of Expenditures of 
Federal Awards 
 
a. Scope of Presentation 
 
The accompanying schedule presents only the expenditures incurred by the City of 
Oceanside, California, that are reimbursable under federal programs of federal financial 
assistance. For the purposes of this schedule, federal awards include both federal financial 
assistance received directly from a federal agency, as well as federal funds received 
indirectly by the City from a non-federal agency or other organization. Only the portion of 
program expenditures reimbursable with such federal funds is reported in the accompanying 
schedule. Program expenditures in excess of the maximum federal reimbursement 
authorized or the portion of the program expenditures that were funded with state, local or 
other non-federal funds are excluded from the accompanying schedule. 
 
b. Basis of Accounting 
 
The expenditures included in the accompanying schedule were reported on the modified 
accrual basis of accounting. Under the modified accrual basis of accounting, expenditures are 
incurred when the City becomes obligated for payment as a result of the receipt of the related 
goods and services. Expenditures reported included any property or equipment acquisitions 
incurred under the federal program. 
 
8


 
 
CITY OF OCEANSIDE 
 
SCHEDULE OF FINDINGS AND QUESTIONED COSTS 
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2013 
SECTION I - SUMMARY OF AUDITORS' RESULTS 
 
Financial Statements 
 
Type of auditors' report issued:  Unmodified Opinion 
 
Internal control over financial reporting: 
 
• 
Significant deficiencies identified? 
        yes 
    X    no 
 
• 
Material weaknesses identified? 
        yes 
    X    none reported 
 
Noncompliance material to financial 
statements noted? 
        yes 
    X    no 
 
Federal Awards 
 
Internal control over major programs: 
 
• 
Significant deficiencies identified? 
        yes 
   X     no 
 
• 
Material weaknesses identified? 
        yes 
    X    none reported 
 
Type of auditors' report issued on compliance for major programs:  Unmodified Opinion 
 
Any audit findings disclosed that are required to be 
reported in accordance with Section 510(a) of  
Circular A-133? 
        yes 
    X    no 
 
Identification of major programs: 
 
CFDA Number(s) 
Name of Federal Program or Cluster   
 
14.218 
Community Development Block Grant 
14.871 
Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers 
 
Dollar threshold used to distinguish 
between type A and type B program 
$573,631  
 
Auditee qualified as low-risk auditee? 
 
         yes 
    X    no 
9


 
 
CITY OF OCEANSIDE 
 
SCHEDULE OF FINDINGS AND QUESTIONED COSTS 
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2013 
 
SECTION II - FINANCIAL STATEMENT FINDINGS 
 
No matters were reported. 
 
 
SECTION III - FEDERAL AWARD FINDINGS AND QUESTIONED COSTS 
 
No matters were reported. 
10


 
 
 
CITY OF OCEANSIDE 
 
SCHEDULE OF PRIOR YEAR FINDINGS AND QUESTIONED COSTS 
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2012 
SECTION II - FINANCIAL STATEMENT FINDINGS 
 
Finding Number 2012-01: Year End Journal Entries 
 
Certain journal entries were made as the result of the account analyses we performed.  These journal entries 
were to correct the recording of the fair market value of investments, the balance of the allowance for doubtful 
accounts, and accrue July 2012 highway users tax revenue. 
 
Management’s Response: Management understands the importance ensuring that all year-end accruals 
revenue are captured and accounts are reconciled correctly. We have implemented additional procedures for 
year-end review of the accounts so that all revenues and expenditures applicable to year-end are accounted 
for and accounts are properly reconciled. 
 
Current Status: The City corrected this finding for the 2012-2013 fiscal year. 
 
Finding Number 2012-02: Fund Balance Restatements 
 
Beginning fund balance restatements were made to adjust certain accounts including receivables, deferred 
revenue, and other prior year revenue and expenses. 
 
Management’s Response: In order to be consistent in our accounting, correct receivables and related 
revenues, it was necessary to adjust accounts. We will review and reconcile accounts for proper accounting 
during the year and at year-end close in order to mitigate any prior period adjustments. 
 
Current Status: The City corrected this finding for the 2012-2013 fiscal year. 
 
SECTION III - FEDERAL AWARD FINDINGS AND QUESTIONED COSTS 
 
No matters were reported. 
 
11
